---
*Note about the document*
> The \@ref(chaptername) syntax is so that the chapter number reference turns out right.
> You can just copy-paste the whole reference - eg. "In Kapitel \@ref(chaptername)" , or leave it blank - I'll go through it later then. 
---
# Summary

Animals in groups gain a variety of advantages while also managing part of the challenges. From a sensory perspective being part of a group challenges the individual sensory system in the multitude of signals to be dealt with. Much work has gone into understanding how passive sensing animals (that rely on vision and hearing), that act as 'receivers' of signals, manage to emit and receive signals in groups. Multiple passive sensing animals may perceive their environment and signals in it without affecting the perception of their neighbour. Active sensing animals in contrast emit probes of energy to detect their surroundings. When multiple active sensing animals form groups, it is expected that they will mutually interfere, or jam each other's sensory systems. Despite the possibility of jamming in groups, many active sensing animals exhibit social behaviours. In this thesis I investigate how active sensing echolocating bats manage to echolocate in groups using a combination of computational simulations, field studies and also contribute methods that ease acoustic tracking and the analysis of echolocation calls.  

In Chapter \@ref(cpnchapter) I quantify the sensory challenge of group echolocation. In groups, the returning echoes of each bat will be overlapped by the intense calls and echoes of their neighbours. The problem of jamming is expected to increase non-linearly with group size. Despite this expectation, bats form large groups in nature. I estimate the detriment in echo detection that bats may experience with increasing group size using computational simulations. I build an experimentally parametrised model implementing details of bat audition, sound propagation and group geometry. I find that bats may still be detecting echoes in group sizes of up to a hundred. Bats in such large groups however may be detecting one neighbour only around one in three calls. The model assumed a simplified auditory system, and thus represents a lower-bound for echo detection. My model represents the first attempt at a biologically parametrised model of group echolocation. The results raise the question about the severity of group echolocation and estimates the sensory input available for collective motion in bat aggregations. 

Chapter \@ref(hbcchapter) is an observational study in the field looking into the echolocation of high duty-cycle bats across group size. High duty-cycle bats emit long calls with short pauses in between. Their long calls and frequent call emission increases the likelihood of call-echo overlaps even in small groups. Due to the challenge of analysing overlapping calls, not much work has been done studying high duty-cycle bat group echolocation, and have primarily been done in flightroom conditions. Using audio and video recordings of free-flying bats in a cave, I analyse the difference in echolocation when CF-FM bats fly alone and when in groups of upto four bats. I develop a package to automate the segmentation and measurent of individual calls into their component parts (described in Chapter \@ref(itsfmchapter)). I also develop a method to analyse audio with overlapping calls and use it in conjunction with simulations to understand if bats alter their echolocation in groups. The results suggest no major changes between the measured call parameters between bats flying alone and in groups. The study contributes know-how in the analysis of overlapping calls and automation of individual call analysis. The study highlights the robustness of bat echolocation, and highlights the importance of field studies to characterise the capabilities of active sensing animals. 

From high duty-cycle bats, Chapter \@ref(ushichkachapter) reports the details of long-term dataset collected at the Orlova Chuka cave looking at group echolocation in free-flying low duty-cycle bats. Low duty-cycle bats emit short calls with longer silences in between. Despite the occasional calling behaviour of FM bats, results from modelling in Chapter \@ref(cpnchapter) show that echo detection can already be affected from group sizes of 30 bats onwards. I present the methods and investigative potential behind what I call the *Ushichka* dataset. *Ushichka* is a multi-channel, multi-sensor dataset of *Myotis myotis* and *Myotis blythii* bats echolocating over a range of group sizes between 1-30 in a cave chamber. The dataset consists of synchronised microphone and thermal-camera arrays, along with a LiDAR scan of the cave chamber. The microphone arrays capture the call emissions, while camera arrays capture flight trajectories. The LiDAR scan provides a contextual 3D record of the volume bats behave in. Given the position, call emission and LiDAR data from the dataset, we can for the first time reconstruct the sensory inputs of individual bats in groups by simulating sound propagation.  Analysing multi-bat audio brings its own challenges such as call overlaps and multi-channel correspondence. However, it is my opinion that the group sizes observed group sizes of upto ~30 bats corresponds to a 'Goldilocks' zone, where current analysis methods may be able to perform satisfactory acoustic tracking. Unlike comparable studies, *Ushichka* ,is to my knowledge, the first such dataset to record the collective behaviour of bats in the wild with multiple sensors simultaneously.

Chapter \@ref(sfscotdoa) marks the beginning of a series of methodological reports contributing to the study of group echolocation. Multi-microphone arrays are central to studies of echolocation. Acoustic arrays provide access to the 3D position of the calling bat, but also add to the logistical effort during field work. Most arrays consist of microphones placed on bulky frames, that are difficult to carry. Their typically rectilinear forms stand out in natural settings and result in artifactual inspection behaviours by the animals themselves. In place of frames, placing microphones freely in the field also brings the heavy burden of having to measure microphone positions each time. In Chapter \@ref(sfscotdoa) I present the results of a collaboration towards a frame-less, measurement-free approach to acoustic tracking. The workflow involves freely placing microphones in a volume and recording a series of common sounds on all channels. The time-differences-of-arrival between channels are then used to estimate microphone positions automatically. In this report we show the sucessful estimation of freely-placed mics in a cave setting to within $\pm$ 4cm of ground-truthed measurements. This is the first time such a  methodology has been applied in the field of echolocation, and it promises to expand the freedom and scale of multi-microphone arrays under field and laboratory settings. Once the bioacoustician is freed from the shackles of microphone frames, naturally available structures can be used to create large-scale inconspicuous arrays, that are also logistically tractable. 

The accuracy of acoustic tracking is affected by a host of factors including array geometry, source sound type and location of sound emission. When designing a microphone array from scratch, or when characterising an array post-hoc, it is important to understand the baseline accuracy the system will show. Chapter \@(tacostchapter) presents the ```tacost``` software package that generates simulated multi-channel audio according to the user-specified  array parameters. While ```tacost``` does not perform acoustic tracking itself, it generates the simulated data to allow the user to compare the consequences of various design choices. ```tacost``` is a tool to assist the optimisation of acoustic tracking systems during the conception phase, and after recordings have been performed. The package is releaseed with an open-source license and online documentation.

The echolocation call is a common sensory 'unit' of study. The acoustic parameters of a call (duration, bandwidth) and its structure (frequency modulation) are tightly linked with the behaviour at hand. Common approaches to measure echolocation calls include using automated inhouse-scripts or manual measurements. Inhouse-scripts suffer from a lack of public scrutiny, while manual measurements do not scale well with sample size. In Chapter \@ref(itsfmchapter), I present the ```itsfm``` software package to automate the segmentation and measurement of echolocation calls. I implement a commonly described method to segment CF-FM calls, along with introducing a new algorithm. The new algorithm is consistently more accurate at segmentation than the commonly described method.  Even though originally developed for the analysis of CF-FM calls, the routines in ```itsfm``` are also of interest for bioacousticians at large, and is released with an open-source license and online documentation.

In conclusion, I briefly describe key findings and outline my vision of future research based on the three-pronged approach to study active sensing in groups. The three-pronged approach consists of 1)advancing techniques to aid easy field-data collection and analysis of audio with overlapping calls, 2) conducting controlled experiments to inform individuals sensory abilities and 3) using the collected data from field studies and controlled experiments to generate and parametrise computational models. This thesis provides a glimpse of the advancements that the three-pronged approach can provide to active sensing with its contributions to computational modelling, field observations and new techniques. 

